# Critical thinking

### Why is it important?
* Helps create strong arguments through proper justification of your claims
* Allows you to contribute to any role -- a very transferable skill

### Skills
* Seek out all sides of an argument
* Check the facts and evidence and respond objectively to them
* Levels of Intellectual skill:
    Evaluate   ^
    Synthesise |
    Analyse    |
    Apply      |
    Understand |
    Remember   | 
This is Benjamin Bloom's triangle

### The process
1. Identify
    * Find the main points of the argument, the claims made, the evidence used, and the conclusions they have reached
2. Analyse
    * Does the evidence really make sense in relation to other research?
    * How old is the material being used?
    * Do you need more information to aid understanding?
    * Does the arguement present a balanced view or are some topics disregarded?
3. Apply
    * Look for the implications of the other information 
    * Look out for weaknesses of the argument and for lack of coverage in the topic

### The three modes of thinking
* Divergent thinking, convergent thinking, and lateral thinking (both)
* Divergent is imagination and convergent is logical -- best to use both

### Enquiry-based learning
* The enquiry cycle:
    Enquire
    Investigate
    Create
    Discuss
    Reflect
* Consider:
    1. What is the source of the evidence?
    2. What are the claims and is there evidence for them?
    3. How clear are the points and is it really a balanced argument?

### Arguments and debating
* Structure:
    * Have a claim, present evidence to support it, and then explain the significance of it
* Coherence:
    * Do the claims make logical sense?
    * Are they based on supporting evidence?
    * Does the supporting evidence really support all the claims made, and is their evidence still relevant now?
    * Quality of evidence = quality of data + quality of interpretation
* Phrase arguments objectively
* Logical fallacies to look out for:
    1. False dichotomy
        When there speaker forces the debate into two possible outcomes despite the possibility of more
    2. Assertion
        When the speaker presents a statement as fact despite it being an assumption or being invalid
    3. Morally flawed
        Arguments that go against ethics and morals
    4. Correlation is not causation
        A speaker mistaking correlation with direct causation
    5. Failure to deliver promises
        Speaker might fail to complete a task they promised to deliver
    6. Strawman
        Creating another stance -- one that wasn't even made -- to debate against
    7. Contradiction
        The speaker contradicts something they said earlier, reducing their credibility
    8. Compare conclusion to reality
        Considers what would happen if the motion became reality
        which usually shows it's more complicated than being suggested

### The art of persuasion
* Three pillars of rhetoric:
    1. Ethos
        Appeal through authority or credibility
    2. Pathos
        Appeal through emotional empathy
    3. Logos
        Appeal through logic and reasoning

* Important skills for debating:
    1. Keep points relevant
    2. Provide objective evidence not personal experience

    Do:
    * Be prepared and stay calm
    * Speak clearly + confidently and keep language simple
    * Actively listen

    Don't:
    * Falsify evidence
    * Publicly disagree with the decision
    * Attack the speaker as opposed to their motion
    * Act aggressively or interrupt other


